Release v0.53.0 (#3872)
grafana/k6: release notes/v0.53.0.md

k6 `v0.53.0` is here 🎉! This release includes:

- Native ECMAScript modules support :tada:!
- New experimental OpenTelemetry metrics output :rocket:!

> - Blob support in experimental websockets module :blob:

Author: ```suggestion
- Blob support in experimental websockets module
```

:(

Either replace
```javascript
module.exports.default = func() {}
```

with the ESM syntax

```javascript
export default func() {}
```

or replace

```javascript
import { sleep } from "k6";
```
 with the CommonJS:

```javascript
const sleep = require("k6").sleep;
```

</details>
#### Imported identifier that can't be resolved are now errors

Previously to this if you were using the ESM syntax but imported identifier `foo` but the exporting file didn't export it - there will be no error.

bar.js:
```javascript
export const notfoo = 5;
```
main.js

```javascript
import { foo } from "./bar.js"
export default function () {
    foo.bar(); // throws exception here
}
```
It would not error out, but on accessing it - there will be an exception as it will be `undefined`.

With native ESM support that is an error as defined by the specification and will error out sooner.

This arguably is an improvement to UX/DX, but we have reports that there are users who have imports like this, but do not use them. So they wouldn't be getting exceptions, but they will now get errors.

The solution in this case is to stop importing the not exported identifiers.

### No more "magic" URL resolution

> For a long time k6 has supported special/magic URLs that aren't really that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a long time, k6 has supported special "magic" URLs that aren't really that.
```

While the cdnjs ones have some more usage, they are both a lot more complicated to support, as they require multiple requests to figure out what needs to be loaded. They also change over time. In addition the only known use at the moment is based on a very old example from an issue and it is even pointing to concrete, old version, of a library.

Given that this can be done with a normal URL, we have decided to drop support for this and have warned users for the last couple of versions.

### Deprecated `k6/experimental/tracing` in favor of a jslib

`k6/experimental/tracing` is arguably not very well named, and there is good chances we would like to use the name for actual trace and span support within k6 in the future.

On top of that it can now be fully supported in js code, which is why [http-instrumentation-tempo
](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/latest/javascript-api/jslib/http-instrumentation-tempo/) was created.

The jslib is a drop in replacement so all you need to do is replace `k6/experimental/tracing` with `https://jslib.k6.io/http-instrumentation-tempo/1.0.0/index.js`.

> The module is planned to be removed in v0.55.0, planned for November 11th, 2024.

Reviewer: I'm curious if connecting with the PR creates a connection in the task, which could be useful for future references 

```suggestion
The module is [planned to be removed in v0.55.0](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3855), planned for November 11th, 2024.
```

### Experimental websockets now require `binaryType` to be set to receive binary messages

As part of the stabilization of the `k6/experimental/websockets` we need to move the default value of `binaryType` to `blob`. It was previously `arraybuffer` and since the last version there was a warning that it needs to be set in order for binary messages to be received.

That warning is now an error.

In the future we will move the default value to `blob` and remove the error.

## New features

The new features include:
- Native ESM support, which also brings some quality of life JavaScript features
- Blob support in the experimental websockets module.
- Experimental OpenTelemetry metrics output.
- Consolidating cloud related commands and features under `k6 cloud`

### Native ESM support [#3456](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3456)

TODO: expand, talk about additional JavaScript features now support, top-level-await, dynamic import, compatibility-mode history

### Blob support in the experimental websockets module [grafana/xk6-websockets#74](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-websockets/pull/74)

> // TODO

Author: @joanlopez can you, please write something about this :bow:

### Experimental OpenTelemetry Output [#3834](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3834)

This release introduces a new experimental output for OpenTelemetry. This allows users to send k6 metrics to any OpenTelemetry-compatible backends. More details and usage examples could be found in the [documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/latest/results-output/real-time/opentelemetry/).

To output metrics to OpenTelemetry, use the `experimental-opentelemetry` output option:

```bash
 k6 run -o experimental-opentelemetry examples/script.js
```

If you have any feedback or issues, please let us know directly in [the extension repository](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-output-opentelemetry/issues).

### Consolidating cloud features under `k6 cloud` [#3813](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3813)

> // TODO

Author: @oleiade can you please fill this up

Reviewer 2: I think this will need a docs PR as well.

## UX improvements and enhancements

- [#3783](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3783) Set correct exit code on invalid configurations. Thank you @ariasmn!
## Bug fixes

- [#3845](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3845) Fix logging to file sometimes missing lines. Thank you @roobre!

## Maintenance and internal improvements

- [#3792](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3792), [#3817](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3817), [#3863](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3863)  Finalize moving to Sobek, our fork of goja.
- [#3815](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3815), [#3840](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3840), [#3821](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3821), [#3836](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3836), [#3840](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3840), [#3844](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3844), [#3821](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3821)  Update dependencies.

> - [#3830](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3830), [#3831](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3831), [#3862](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3862) Refactoring and cleanup around ESM PR.

Author: This need more work

## _Optional_ Roadmap

> // TODO: top-level-await, dynamic import, import.meta.resolve, `global` and compatibility-mode?!?

Author: Anyone wants anything else here?

Shall we remind people what will break in v0.54.0? Maybe have a list of breaking changes for upcoming releases ?

Reviewer 3: Yeah, having a list of breaking changes would be a good idea.

Reviewer 4: I think it's fair to announce here another iteration of the `k6 cloud` (sub)commands, with things like https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3818 and https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3835.

Wdyt? @oleiade

### Future breaking changes

> #### StatsD removal

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
#### Experimental browser module removal

In the previous release, the browser module graduated from experimental to stable. The `k6/experimental/browser` module will be removed in `v0.54.0`. To keep your scripts working you need to [migrate to the `k6/browser` module](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/latest/using-k6-browser/migrating-to-k6-v0-52/).

#### StatsD removal
```

> This release we also fixed the version where we will remove the StatsD output. The StatsD output will be removed in the `v0.55.0` release. If you are using the StatsD output, please consider migrating to the extension [LeonAdato/xk6-output-statsd](https://github.com/LeonAdato/xk6-output-statsd).

Reviewer: will -> going to :sweat_smile: 

```suggestion
In this release, we also fixed the version where we will remove the StatsD output. The StatsD output [is going to be removed in the `v0.55.0`](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3849) release. If you are using the StatsD output, please consider migrating to the extension [LeonAdato/xk6-output-statsd](https://github.com/LeonAdato/xk6-output-statsd).
```

k6 `v0.53.0` is here 🎉! This release includes:

- Native ECMAScript modules support :tada:!
- New experimental OpenTelemetry metrics output :rocket:!
- Blob support in experimental websockets module
- Consolidating cloud features and commands under `k6 cloud` :cloud:

> - Breaking change: remove magic URL resolutions :stop_sign:

Reviewer 3: I would prefer if we drop all the emojis, they don't add any additional value. IMHO.

## Breaking changes

### Require is now specification compliant and always resolve based on the file it is written in [#3534](https://github.com/grafana/k6/issues/3534)

> `require` in k6 used to resolve identifiers based on the current "root of execution"(more on that later). In a lot of cases that aligns with the file the `require` is written in or a file in the same folder, which leads to the same result. In small subset of cases this isn't case.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`require` in k6 used to resolve identifiers based on the current "root of execution" (more on that later). In a lot of cases that aligns with the file the `require` is written in or a file in the same folder, which leads to the same result. In a small subset of cases, this isn't the case.
```
I'm not sure "root of execution" is a clear enough term here.

This is very much an implementation detail that has leaked and likely a not intended one.

Whenever a file is `require`-ed it become the "root of execution" and both `require` and `open` become relative to it. Once the `require` finishes, the previous "root of execution" gets restored. During not init context execution, the main file is the "root of execution".

Example:

Have 3 files:
main.js
```javascript
const s = require("./A/a.js")
if (s() != 5) {
	throw "Bad"
}
module.exports.default = () =>{} // just for k6 to not error
```

/A/a.js:
```javascript
module.exports =  function () {
  return require("./b.js");
}
```
/A/b.js
```javascript
module.exports = 5
```
In this example when `require` is called in `/A/a.js` the `main.js` is once again the "root of execution". If you call the function in `/A/a.js` just after defining it though, it will work as expected.

</details

In order to facilitate being able to write helpers that use `require` (or [dynamic import](https://github.com/grafana/k6/issues/3859) and `open` in the future) there is currently [proposal](https://github.com/grafana/k6/issues/3856) to add `import.meta.resolve` to k6.

> ### ECMAScript Modules(ESM) Native Support related breaking changes:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### ECMAScript Modules (ESM)
```

I don't think we need to detail it in the title. The text after does already.

Author: I prefer to have it as there are quite a few breaking changes and arguably ESM isn't a breaking change - there are breaking changes due to it no being native.

#### Mixing CommonJS and ESM

Previously, k6 used a transpiler (Babel) internally to transpile ESM syntax to CommonJS. That led to all code always being CommonJS, and if you had CommonJS next to it, Babel would not complain.

As k6 (or the underlying JS VM implementation) did not understand ESM in itself and that CommonJS is a 100% during execution feature, this was not easy to detect or prevent.

We added a  [warning](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3807) in v0.52.0 to give users time for migration.

To fix this - all you need is to stick to either CommonJS or ESM within each file.

<details>
  <summary>Code examples and proposed changes</summary>

```javascript
import { sleep } from "k6";

module.exports.default = func() { ...}
```

In the example above both ESM and CommonJS are used in the same file.

Either replace
```javascript
module.exports.default = func() {}
```

with the ESM syntax

```javascript
export default func() {}
```

or replace

```javascript
import { sleep } from "k6";
```
 with the CommonJS:

```javascript
const sleep = require("k6").sleep;
```

> </details>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
</details>

```
I guess this is the reason why the next section doesn't render correctly

#### Imported identifier that can't be resolved are now errors

Previously to this if you were using the ESM syntax but imported identifier `foo` but the exporting file didn't export it - there will be no error.

bar.js:
```javascript
export const notfoo = 5;
```
main.js

```javascript
import { foo } from "./bar.js"
export default function () {
    foo.bar(); // throws exception here
}
```
It would not error out, but when it is accessed, there will be an exception as it will be `undefined`.

With native ESM support, that is an error as defined by the specification and will occur sooner.

This arguably improves UX/DX, but we have reports that some users have imports like this but do not use them. So, they wouldn't be getting exceptions, but they would now get errors.

The solution, in this case, is to stop importing the not exported identifiers.

### No more "magic" URL resolution

> For a long time, k6 has supported special "magic" URLs that aren't really that.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For a long time, k6 has supported special _magic_ URLs that aren't really that.
```

> Those were URLs without a scheme, that :

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Those were URLs without a scheme, that:
```

`k6/experimental/tracing` is arguably not very well named, and there is good chances we would like to use the name for actual trace and span support within k6 in the future.

On top of that it can now be fully supported in js code, which is why [http-instrumentation-tempo
](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/latest/javascript-api/jslib/http-instrumentation-tempo/) was created.

The JavaScript implementation is a drop-in replacement, so all you need to do is replace `k6/experimental/tracing` with `https://jslib.k6.io/http-instrumentation-tempo/1.0.0/index.js`.

The module is [planned to be removed in v0.55.0](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3855), planned for November 11th, 2024.

### Experimental websockets now require `binaryType` to be set to receive binary messages

As part of the stabilization of the `k6/experimental/websockets` we need to move the default value of `binaryType` to `blob`. It was previously `arraybuffer` and since the last version there was a warning that it needs to be set in order for binary messages to be received.

That warning is now an error.

In the future we will move the default value to `blob` and remove the error.

## New features

> The new features include:
> - Native ESM support, which also brings some quality of life JavaScript features
> - Blob support in the experimental websockets module.
> - Experimental OpenTelemetry metrics output.
> - Consolidating cloud related commands and features under `k6 cloud`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The new features include:
- Native ESM support, which also brings some quality of life JavaScript features
- Blob support in the experimental websockets module
- Experimental OpenTelemetry metrics output
- Consolidating cloud related commands and features under `k6 cloud`
```

### Blob support in the experimental websockets module [grafana/xk6-websockets#74](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-websockets/pull/74)

// TODO

### Experimental OpenTelemetry Output [#3834](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3834)

This release introduces a new experimental output for OpenTelemetry. This allows users to send k6 metrics to any OpenTelemetry-compatible backends. More details and usage examples could be found in the [documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/latest/results-output/real-time/opentelemetry/).

To output metrics to OpenTelemetry, use the `experimental-opentelemetry` output option:

```bash
 k6 run -o experimental-opentelemetry examples/script.js
```

If you have any feedback or issues, please let us know directly in [the extension repository](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-output-opentelemetry/issues).

### Consolidating cloud features under `k6 cloud` [#3813](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3813)

// TODO

## UX improvements and enhancements

- [#3783](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3783) Set correct exit code on invalid configurations. Thank you @ariasmn!

> - https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3868

Reviewer 3: We need a description here

## Bug fixes

> - https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3746

Reviewer 3: Description missing

- [#3845](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3845) Fix logging to file sometimes missing lines. Thank you @roobre!
- [browser#1391](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/1391) Fix race conditions in internal event handling.

## Maintenance and internal improvements

> - [#3792](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3792), [#3817](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3817), [#3863](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3863)  Finalize moving to Sobek, our fork of goja.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [#3792](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3792), [#3817](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3817), [#3863](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3863) Finalize moving to Sobek, our fork of goja.
```

> - [#3815](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3815), [#3840](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3840), [#3821](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3821), [#3836](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3836), [#3840](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3840), [#3844](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3844), [#3821](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3821)  Update dependencies.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [#3815](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3815), [#3840](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3840), [#3821](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3821), [#3836](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3836), [#3840](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3840), [#3844](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3844), [#3821](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3821) Update dependencies.
```

- [#3830](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3830), [#3831](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3831), [#3862](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3862) Refactoring and cleanup around ESM PR.
- [browser#1389](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/1389) Move deserialization of `BrowserContextOptions` into mapping layer.
- https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3841
- https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3837 + https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3847
- https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3870

> - https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3851

Reviewer 3: Missing descriptions

k6 `v0.53.0` is here 🎉! This release includes:

- Native ECMAScript modules support :tada:!
- New experimental OpenTelemetry metrics output :rocket:!
- Blob support in experimental websockets module
- Consolidating cloud features and commands under `k6 cloud` :cloud:
- Breaking change: remove magic URL resolutions :stop_sign:

## Breaking changes

### Require is now specification compliant and always resolve based on the file it is written in [#3534](https://github.com/grafana/k6/issues/3534)

> `require` in k6 used to resolve identifiers based on the current "root of execution" (more on that later). In a lot of cases that aligns with the file the `require` is written in or a file in the same folder, which leads to the same result. In a small subset of cases, this isn't the case.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The `require` keyword in k6 used to resolve identifiers based on the current "root of execution" (more on that later). In a lot of cases that aligns with the file the `require` is written in or a file in the same folder, which leads to the same result. In a small subset of cases, this isn't the case.
```

Author: require is not keyword - it is just a function

Reviewer 2: Can we change it to "The `require` function"?

There was a warning message for the last 2 releases trying to tease out cases where that would be problematic.

<details>
  <summary>"root of exeuction" explanation</summary>
This is very much an implementation detail that has leaked and likely a not intended one.

Whenever a file is `require`-ed it become the "root of execution" and both `require` and `open` become relative to it. Once the `require` finishes, the previous "root of execution" gets restored. During not init context execution, the main file is the "root of execution".

Example:

Have 3 files:
main.js
```javascript
const s = require("./A/a.js")
if (s() != 5) {
	throw "Bad"
}
module.exports.default = () =>{} // just for k6 to not error
```

/A/a.js:
```javascript
module.exports =  function () {
  return require("./b.js");
}
```
/A/b.js
```javascript
module.exports = 5
```
In this example when `require` is called in `/A/a.js` the `main.js` is once again the "root of execution". If you call the function in `/A/a.js` just after defining it though, it will work as expected.

</details

> In order to facilitate being able to write helpers that use `require` (or [dynamic import](https://github.com/grafana/k6/issues/3859) and `open` in the future) there is currently [proposal](https://github.com/grafana/k6/issues/3856) to add `import.meta.resolve` to k6.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In order to facilitate being able to write helpers that use `require` (or [dynamic import](https://github.com/grafana/k6/issues/3859) and `open` in the future) there is currently [a proposal](https://github.com/grafana/k6/issues/3856) to add `import.meta.resolve` to k6.
```

That warning is now an error.

In the future we will move the default value to `blob` and remove the error.

## New features

The new features include:
- Native ESM support, which also brings some quality of life JavaScript features
- Blob support in the experimental websockets module
- Experimental OpenTelemetry metrics output
- Consolidating cloud related commands and features under `k6 cloud`

### Native ESM support [#3456](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3456)

With this feature k6 is now ES6+ compliant natively. Which means (asterisk free) support for [the spread operator with object](https://github.com/grafana/k6/issues/824), [private class fields](https://github.com/grafana/k6/issues/2887) and [optional chaining](https://github.com/grafana/k6/issues/2168)

But also faster startup times, more consistent errors and easier addition of features as we now only need to add them to Sobek instead of also them being supported in the internal Babel.

> <details>
>   <summary>History of compatibility mode and ECMAScript specification compliance</summary>
> 
> Some history: More than 6 years go k6 started using core-js and babel to get ES6+ features. core-js is implementation of a lot of the types and their features such as [`String.prototype.matchAll`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/String/matchAll) among other things, and Babel gets one piece of code that uses some syntax and returns a piece of code doing the same thing (mostly) but with different syntax. Usually with the idea of supporting newer syntax but returning code that can run on runtimes which only support old syntax.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<details>
  <summary>History of compatibility mode and ECMAScript specification compliance</summary>

Some history: More than 6 years ago k6 started using core-js and babel to get ES6+ features. core-js is a implementation of a lot of the types and their features such as [`String.prototype.matchAll`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/String/matchAll) among other things, and Babel gets one piece of code that uses some syntax and returns a piece of code doing the same thing (mostly) but with different syntax. Usually with the idea of supporting newer syntax but returning code that can run on runtimes which only support old syntax.
```

But it means that now on each start it needs to do a bunch of work that adds up.

So long time ago for people who would want to not have to do this we added [compatibility-mode=base](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/1206). This allowed you to potentially not use this features and get a big speedup. Or use them outside of k6 and likely still get significant speed up if you cut down on it.

At the same time the author and maintainer of the JS runtime we used (goja) did implement a *big* portion of what we were missing from core-js and also Babel. After some experiments to cut down the core-js we import we ended up contributing back the remaining parts and dropping the whole library. Which lead to 5 times reduction of memory per VU for simple scripts. And even for fairly complicated ones.

With this in mind we did try to cut down Babel as well and contribute back the simpler things it was used for. This over the years lead to small pieces of what Babel did being moved to goja and then disabled in Babel. Some of those were just easy wins, some of those were things that had very bad pathological cases where using a particular syntax made transpilation times explode.

> In all of that work there always were small (or not so small) breaking changes due to many factors - sometimes our new implementation was slightly wrong and we needed to fix, sometimes more than what was in the standard was enabled in core-js or Babel, sometimes hthe standard changed on those. And sometimes the implementation in Babel or core-js wasn't as full and didn't account for all corner cases.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In all of that work there always were small (or not so small) breaking changes due to many factors - sometimes our new implementation was slightly wrong and we needed to fix, sometimes more than what was in the standard was enabled in core-js or Babel, sometimes the standard changed on those. And sometimes the implementation in Babel or core-js wasn't as full and didn't account for all corner cases.
```

This also aligns with how ESM and dynamic `import` also work. In order to align with them `require` now uses the same underlying implementation.

There was a warning message for the last 2 releases trying to tease out cases where that would be problematic.

<details>
  <summary>"root of execution" explanation</summary>

This is very much an implementation detail that has leaked and likely a not intended one.

Whenever a file is `require`-ed it become the "root of execution" and both `require` and `open` become relative to it. Once the `require` finishes, the previous "root of execution" gets restored. During not init context execution, the main file is the "root of execution".

Example:

Have 3 files:
main.js
```javascript
const s = require("./A/a.js")
if (s() != 5) {
	throw "Bad"
}
module.exports.default = () =>{} // just for k6 to not error
```

/A/a.js:
```javascript
module.exports =  function () {
  return require("./b.js");
}
```
/A/b.js
```javascript
module.exports = 5
```
In this example when `require` is called in `/A/a.js` the `main.js` is once again the "root of execution". If you call the function in `/A/a.js` just after defining it though, it will work as expected.

> </details

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
</details>
```

In all of that work there always were small (or not so small) breaking changes due to many factors - sometimes our new implementation was slightly wrong and we needed to fix, sometimes more than what was in the standard was enabled in core-js or Babel, sometimes the standard changed on those. And sometimes the implementation in Babel or core-js wasn't as full and didn't account for all corner cases.

ECMAScript Modules(ESM) is the last such feature that Babel was used for. It also happens to be likely the one *most* people used, due to the fact that it is the standard way to reuse code and import libraries.

While the work on this feature started over 2 years ago, it both depended on other features that weren't there yet, but also interacts with more or less every other feature that is part of the ECMAScript standard.

Along the way there were many internal refactors as well as additional tests to make certain we can be as backwards compatible as possible. But there also ended up being things that just weren't going to be compatible, like the listed breaking changes.

</details>

> After ESM now being natively supported, compatibility-mode `base` vs `extended` has only 1 feature difference - aliasing `global` to `globalThis` to make it a bit more compatible with (old) Node.js. There is ongoing [discussion](https://github.com/grafana/k6/issues/3864) if that as well should be removed.

Reviewer 2: Do we need to make any updates to the [JavaScript and TypeScript compatibility mode](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/latest/using-k6/javascript-typescript-compatibility-mode/) page for this release?

Author: Yeah, but mostly by mostly just dropping stuff.

I will try to get to it before next week, but have some more urgent fixes to do and am off tomorrow.

For the purposes of having less intrusive changes and shipping this earlier a few things have not been implemented in k6. That includes top-level-await and dynamic import support. Both of them are likely to land in the next version.

> ### Blob support in the experimental websockets module [grafana/xk6-websockets#74](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-websockets/pull/74)

Reviewer 2: I think this needs a docs update as well. Maybe @joanlopez?

Reviewer 2: Fixed by https://github.com/grafana/k6-docs/pull/1690.

So, from now on it can be used with `import { Blob } from "k6/experimental/websockets";`. In the future, apart from graduating this module to stable, we might also want to expose the `Blob` interface globally (no imports will be required). But for now, please remind that its support is still experimental, as the entire module is.

### Experimental OpenTelemetry Output [#3834](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3834)

This release introduces a new experimental output for OpenTelemetry. This allows users to send k6 metrics to any OpenTelemetry-compatible backends. More details and usage examples could be found in the [documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/latest/results-output/real-time/opentelemetry/).

To output metrics to OpenTelemetry, use the `experimental-opentelemetry` output option:

```bash
 k6 run -o experimental-opentelemetry examples/script.js
```

If you have any feedback or issues, please let us know directly in [the extension repository](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-output-opentelemetry/issues).

### Consolidating cloud features under `k6 cloud` [#3813](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3813)

> // TODO

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This release introduces the first iteration of the revamped cloud-related commands under the `k6 cloud` command, featuring two new subcommands:

- `k6 cloud login`: replaces `k6 login cloud` for authenticating with the cloud service. It supports token-based authentication only. The previous authentication method using email and password will still be available through the legacy `k6 login cloud` command, which is now deprecated and will be removed in a future release (no removal date set yet).

- `k6 cloud run`: is the new official way to run k6 on the cloud service, serving as an alternative to the existing `k6 cloud` command. The `k6 cloud` command will remain available for a few more versions but will eventually function only as a wrapper for all cloud-related commands, without any direct functionality.
```

k6 `v0.53.0` is here 🎉! This release includes:

> - Native ECMAScript modules support

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Native ECMAScript module support
```

Author: I prefer to keep it in plural as that is how it is used in most places.

- New experimental OpenTelemetry metrics output
- Blob support in experimental websockets module

> - Consolidating cloud features and commands under `k6 cloud`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Consolidate cloud features and commands under `k6 cloud`
```

- Breaking change: remove magic URL resolutions

## Breaking changes

> ### Require is now specification compliant and always resolve based on the file it is written in [#3534](https://github.com/grafana/k6/issues/3534)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Require is now specification compliant and always resolves based on the file it is written in [#3534](https://github.com/grafana/k6/issues/3534)
```

> `require` in k6 used to resolve identifiers based on the current "root of execution" (more on that later). In a lot of cases that aligns with the file the `require` is written in or a file in the same folder, which leads to the same result. In a small subset of cases, this isn't the case.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `require` function in k6 used to resolve identifiers based on the current "root of execution" (more on that later). In a lot of cases, that aligns with the file the `require` is written in or a file in the same folder, which leads to the same result. In a small subset of cases, this isn't the case.
```

> Every other implementation and more or less by the CommonJS specification - require should always be relative to the file it is written in.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In every other implementation, and more or less by the CommonJS specification, `require` should always be relative to the file it is written in.
```

This also aligns with how ESM and dynamic `import` also work. In order to align with them `require` now uses the same underlying implementation.

There was a warning message for the last 2 releases trying to tease out cases where that would be problematic.

<details>
  <summary>"root of execution" explanation</summary>

This is very much an implementation detail that has leaked and likely a not intended one.

> Whenever a file is `require`-ed it become the "root of execution" and both `require` and `open` become relative to it. Once the `require` finishes, the previous "root of execution" gets restored. During not init context execution, the main file is the "root of execution".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Whenever a file is `require`-ed it becomes the "root of execution", and both `require` and `open` become relative to it. Once the `require` finishes, the previous "root of execution" gets restored. During the `init` context execution, the main file is the "root of execution".
```

I'm not sure about the "During not init context execution" edit, I think it should either be "During the `init` context execution", or "Outside of the `init` context execution"?

Author: It should be outside of - I will fix it

Example:

Have 3 files:
main.js
```javascript
const s = require("./A/a.js")
if (s() != 5) {
	throw "Bad"
}
module.exports.default = () =>{} // just for k6 to not error
```

/A/a.js:
```javascript
module.exports = function () {
  return require("./b.js");
}
```
/A/b.js
```javascript
module.exports = 5
```
In this example when `require` is called in `/A/a.js` the `main.js` is once again the "root of execution". If you call the function in `/A/a.js` just after defining it though, it will work as expected.

</details>

> You might want to use the newly added `import.meta.resolve()` if you want to create a path that is relevant to the currently calling module. This will let you call it outside a helper class and provide the path to it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use the newly added `import.meta.resolve()` function if you want to create a path that is relevant to the currently calling module. That will let you call it outside of a helper class and provide the path to it. Refer to [docs](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/next/javascript-api/import.meta/resolve/) for more details.
```

That should be the correct URL once we merge https://github.com/grafana/k6-docs/pull/1691.

Author: Isn't using `next` a bad idea? Shouldn't it be `latest` ?

Reviewer 2: Yes, thanks for catching @mstoykov! 🙇

> ### ECMAScript Modules(ESM) Native Support related breaking changes:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### ECMAScript Modules (ESM) Native Support related breaking changes
```

> As part of the implementation, two common patterns broken in the ecosystem became apparent.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As part of the ESM native support implementation, two common broken patterns in the ecosystem became apparent.
```

One is arguably a developer experience improvement, and the other is a consequence of the previous implementation.

#### Mixing CommonJS and ESM

Previously, k6 used a transpiler (Babel) internally to transpile ESM syntax to CommonJS. That led to all code always being CommonJS, and if you had CommonJS next to it, Babel would not complain.

As k6 (or the underlying JS VM implementation) did not understand ESM in itself and that CommonJS is a 100% during execution feature, this was not easy to detect or prevent.

> We added a  [warning](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3807) in v0.52.0 to give users time for migration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We added a [warning](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3807) in v0.52.0 to give users time for migration.
```

To fix this - all you need is to stick to either CommonJS or ESM within each file.

<details>
  <summary>Code examples and proposed changes</summary>

```javascript
import { sleep } from "k6";

module.exports.default = func() { ...}
```

In the example above both ESM and CommonJS are used in the same file.

> Either replace

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can either replace:

```

```javascript
module.exports.default = func() {}
```

> with the ESM syntax

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the ESM syntax:
```

```javascript
export default func() {}
```

> or replace

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Or replace:
```

```javascript
import { sleep } from "k6";
```

>  with the CommonJS:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

With CommonJS:
```

```javascript
const sleep = require("k6").sleep;
```

</details>

#### Imported identifier that can't be resolved are now errors

> Previously to this if you were using the ESM syntax but imported identifier `foo` but the exporting file didn't export it - there will be no error.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Previous to this, if you were using the ESM syntax and imported the `foo` identifier, but the exporting file didn't export it, there wouldn't be an error.
```

bar.js:
```javascript
export const notfoo = 5;

> ```
> main.js
> 
> ```javascript

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```

main.js
```javascript
````

import { foo } from "./bar.js"
export default function () {
    foo.bar(); // throws exception here
}
```

> It would not error out, but when it is accessed, there will be an exception as it will be `undefined`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

The example would not error out, but when it is accessed, there would be an exception as `foo` would be `undefined`.
```

With native ESM support, that is an error as defined by the specification and will occur sooner.

This arguably improves UX/DX, but we have reports that some users have imports like this but do not use them. So, they wouldn't be getting exceptions, but they would now get errors.

The solution, in this case, is to stop importing the not exported identifiers.

### No more "magic" URL resolution

For a long time, k6 has supported special _magic_ URLs that aren't really that.

> Those were URLs without a scheme, that:
> 1. started with `github.com` that if pasted in a browser will not open you the file. Their appeal was that you can more easily write them by hand if you know the path within a github repo.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Those were URLs without a scheme that:

1. Started with `github.com`, and if pasted to a browser won't open to a file. Their appeal was that you can more easily write them by hand if you know the path within a GitHub repo.
```

> 2. started with `cdnjs.com` that if pasted in a browser will open an web page with all the versions of the library. The appeal here is that you will get the latest version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Started with `cdnjs.com`, and if pasted to a browser will open a web page with all the versions of the library. The appeal here is that you will get the latest version.
```

Both of them had problems though.

> The github ones seemed to have never be used by users, likely because you need to guess what the path should look like, and you can always just go get a real URL to the raw file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The GitHub ones seemed to have never been used by users, likely because you need to guess what the path should look like, and you can always just go get a real URL to the raw file.
```

While the cdnjs ones have some more usage, they are both a lot more complicated to support, as they require multiple requests to figure out what needs to be loaded. They also change over time. In addition the only known use at the moment is based on a very old example from an issue and it is even pointing to concrete, old version, of a library.

Given that this can be done with a normal URL, we have decided to drop support for this and have warned users for the last couple of versions.

### Deprecated `k6/experimental/tracing` in favor of a JavaScript implementation

> `k6/experimental/tracing` is arguably not very well named, and there is good chances we would like to use the name for actual trace and span support within k6 in the future.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`k6/experimental/tracing` is arguably not very well named, and there is a good chance we would like to use the name for actual trace and span support within k6 in the future.
```

While the work on this feature started over 2 years ago, it both depended on other features that weren't there yet, but also interacts with more or less every other feature that is part of the ECMAScript standard.

Along the way there were many internal refactors as well as additional tests to make certain we can be as backwards compatible as possible. But there also ended up being things that just weren't going to be compatible, like the listed breaking changes.

</details>

After ESM now being natively supported, compatibility-mode `base` vs `extended` has only 1 feature difference - aliasing `global` to `globalThis` to make it a bit more compatible with (old) Node.js. There is ongoing [discussion](https://github.com/grafana/k6/issues/3864) if that as well should be removed.

For the purposes of having less intrusive changes and shipping this earlier a few things have not been implemented in k6. That includes top-level-await and dynamic import support. Both of them are likely to land in the next version.

> ### `import.meta.resolve()` get URL from a relative path the same way `import` or `require` does [#3873](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3873)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### `import.meta.resolve()` gets an URL from a relative path the same way `import` or `require` does [#3873](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3873)
```

As part of the move to ESM a lot of cases where k6 currently do not resolve the same relative path to the same file were found. Some of those were fixed - as those in `require`, but others haven't.

It also became apparent some users do use the relativity of `require`, but also `open`. As we move to make this consistent among uses, we decided to let users have a better transition path forward.

Using `import.meta.resolve` will give you just a new URL that can be used in all functions and it will give you the same result.

> `import.meta.resolve` uses the same algorithm and relativity as ESM import syntax.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`import.meta.resolve` uses the same algorithm and relativity as ESM import syntax. Refer to [docs](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/next/javascript-api/import.meta/resolve/) for more details.
```

### Blob support in the experimental websockets module [grafana/xk6-websockets#74](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-websockets/pull/74)

In order to support the default `WebSocket.binaryType` type as per spec (`"blob"`),  we have added support for the [`Blob` interface](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Blob) as part of the features included in the `xk6-websockets` module. 

> So, from now on it can be used with `import { Blob } from "k6/experimental/websockets";`. In the future, apart from graduating this module to stable, we might also want to expose the `Blob` interface globally (no imports will be required). But for now, please remind that its support is still experimental, as the entire module is.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So, from now on it can be used with `import { Blob } from "k6/experimental/websockets";`. In the future, apart from graduating this module to stable, we might also want to expose the `Blob` interface globally (no imports will be required). But for now, please remind that its support is still experimental, as the entire module is. Refer to the [docs](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/next/javascript-api/k6-experimental/websockets/blob/) for more details.
```

That should be the correct URL once https://github.com/grafana/k6-docs/pull/1690 is merged.

### Experimental OpenTelemetry Output [#3834](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3834)

> This release introduces a new experimental output for OpenTelemetry. This allows users to send k6 metrics to any OpenTelemetry-compatible backends. More details and usage examples could be found in the [documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/latest/results-output/real-time/opentelemetry/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This release introduces a new experimental output for OpenTelemetry. This allows users to send k6 metrics to any OpenTelemetry-compatible backends. More details and usage examples can be found in the [documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/latest/results-output/real-time/opentelemetry/).
```

- [#3815](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3815), [#3840](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3840), [#3821](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3821), [#3836](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3836), [#3840](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3840), [#3844](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3844), [#3821](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3821) Update dependencies.
- [#3830](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3830), [#3831](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3831), [#3862](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3862) Refactoring and cleanup around ESM PR.
- [browser#1389](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/1389) Move deserialization of `BrowserContextOptions` into mapping layer.
- [#3841](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3841) Add browser and cloud support information to the README. Thank you @sniku!
- [#3843](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3837), [#3847](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3847) `k6/experimental/timers` deprecation warning updates.
- [#3851](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3851) Simplify gRPC streams metrics tags tests.
- [#3870](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3870) Update tests to work with go1.22.

## _Optional_ Roadmap

> // TODO: top-level-await, dynamic import, `global` and compatibility-mode?!?

Reviewer 2: Do we need to remove this line? 🤔

There was a warning message for the last 2 releases trying to tease out cases where that would be problematic.

<details>
  <summary>"root of execution" explanation</summary>

This is very much an implementation detail that has leaked and likely a not intended one.

Whenever a file is `require`-ed it becomes the "root of execution", and both `require` and `open` become relative to it. Once the `require` finishes, the previous "root of execution" gets restored. During the `init` context execution, the main file is the "root of execution".

Example:

Have 3 files:
main.js
```javascript
const s = require("./A/a.js")
if (s() != 5) {
	throw "Bad"
}
module.exports.default = () =>{} // just for k6 to not error
```

/A/a.js:
```javascript
module.exports = function () {
  return require("./b.js");
}
```
/A/b.js
```javascript
module.exports = 5
```
In this example when `require` is called in `/A/a.js` the `main.js` is once again the "root of execution". If you call the function in `/A/a.js` just after defining it though, it will work as expected.

</details>

> You can use the newly added `import.meta.resolve()` function if you want to create a path that is relevant to the currently calling module. That will let you call it outside of a helper class and provide the path to it. Refer to [docs](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/next/javascript-api/import.meta/resolve/) for more details.

Author: ```suggestion
You can use the newly added `import.meta.resolve()` function if you want to create a path that is relevant to the currently calling module. That will let you call it outside of a helper class and provide the path to it. Refer to [docs](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/latest/javascript-api/import.meta/resolve/) for more details.
```

For the purposes of having less intrusive changes and shipping this earlier a few things have not been implemented in k6. That includes top-level-await and dynamic import support. Both of them are likely to land in the next version.

### `import.meta.resolve()` gets an URL from a relative path the same way `import` or `require` does [#3873](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3873)

As part of the move to ESM a lot of cases where k6 currently do not resolve the same relative path to the same file were found. Some of those were fixed - as those in `require`, but others haven't.

It also became apparent some users do use the relativity of `require`, but also `open`. As we move to make this consistent among uses, we decided to let users have a better transition path forward.

Using `import.meta.resolve` will give you just a new URL that can be used in all functions and it will give you the same result.

> `import.meta.resolve` uses the same algorithm and relativity as ESM import syntax. Refer to [docs](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/next/javascript-api/import.meta/resolve/) for more details.

Author: ```suggestion
`import.meta.resolve` uses the same algorithm and relativity as ESM import syntax. Refer to [docs](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/latest/javascript-api/import.meta/resolve/) for more details.
```

### Blob support in the experimental websockets module [grafana/xk6-websockets#74](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-websockets/pull/74)

In order to support the default `WebSocket.binaryType` type as per spec (`"blob"`),  we have added support for the [`Blob` interface](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Blob) as part of the features included in the `xk6-websockets` module. 

> So, from now on it can be used with `import { Blob } from "k6/experimental/websockets";`. In the future, apart from graduating this module to stable, we might also want to expose the `Blob` interface globally (no imports will be required). But for now, please remind that its support is still experimental, as the entire module is. Refer to the [docs](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/next/javascript-api/k6-experimental/websockets/blob/) for more details.

Author: ```suggestion
So, from now on it can be used with `import { Blob } from "k6/experimental/websockets";`. In the future, apart from graduating this module to stable, we might also want to expose the `Blob` interface globally (no imports will be required). But for now, please remind that its support is still experimental, as the entire module is. Refer to the [docs](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/latest/javascript-api/k6-experimental/websockets/blob/) for more details.
```

- [#3815](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3815), [#3840](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3840), [#3821](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3821), [#3836](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3836), [#3840](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3840), [#3844](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3844), [#3821](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3821) Update dependencies.
- [#3830](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3830), [#3831](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3831), [#3862](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3862) Refactoring and cleanup around ESM PR.
- [browser#1389](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-browser/pull/1389) Move deserialization of `BrowserContextOptions` into mapping layer.
- [#3841](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3841) Add browser and cloud support information to the README. Thank you @sniku!
- [#3843](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3837), [#3847](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3847) `k6/experimental/timers` deprecation warning updates.
- [#3851](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3851) Simplify gRPC streams metrics tags tests.
- [#3870](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/3870) Update tests to work with go1.22.

> ## _Optional_ Roadmap
> // TODO: top-level-await, dynamic import, `global` and compatibility-mode?!?

Author: ```suggestion
## Roadmap
```
